You nailed the diagnosis, and your read of the experiment is exactly how a good system gets iterated:

BE lock helped (givebacks 5/5 → 2/5; expectancy improved).

But it can’t fully help because time stop is an override exit that ignores your stop level and uses a close/open fill mechanism.

So the next step is not “more BE logic.” It’s fixing the time stop design.

And since you said you want advice-only: here’s the cleanest way to modify time stops without turning the engine into spaghetti.

The real design flaw

Your time stop is currently:

“At 30 minutes, if current PnL < +0.5R → exit at next bar open.”

That punishes trades that had legitimate expansion and then mean-reverted. It also bypasses protective stop rules.

So time stop should only apply to trades that never proved momentum.

The correct next change
✅ Replace the 30-minute time stop with a “momentum validation window”

You already proposed the right one:

If trade does not reach +0.3R within 3 bars (15 minutes), exit.

This does 2 things:

kills dead trades early

stops penalizing trades that expanded early then mean-reverted (because they’d have already “validated”)

But here’s the key improvement:

Once a trade validates (hits +0.3R), it becomes immune to the time stop.

So time stop becomes a “validation failure exit” not a “late-stage cleanup exit.”

Concrete rules to implement (clean logic)

Use two flags:

validated = false initially

breakevenArmed = false initially

On each bar:

Update MFE_R.

If !validated and mfeR >= 0.3 → set validated = true

If !breakevenArmed and mfeR >= 0.5 → move stop to entry; set breakevenArmed = true

Validation time stop:
If !validated and barsSinceEntry >= 3 and currentR < 0.3 → exit (time stop / scratch)

Remove/disable the old 30-minute time stop entirely, or make it conditional: only if !validated.

That last point is critical.

Thresholds I recommend for this phase

Validation threshold: +0.3R

Window: 3 bars (15 minutes on 5m)

BE arm: +0.5R (keep it)

Why:

Your MFE peaks at 10–15 minutes — you’re matching reality.

+0.3R is “the move started” without demanding too much.

+0.5R BE is “it’s real enough to protect.”

What success should look like after this change

After rerunning the same 10 days:

Time stop exits should drop a lot (or become early scratches)

Avg loss should improve (dead trades cut earlier)

Givebacks should shrink further (BE arm)

Expectancy should move meaningfully (if there’s any real edge)

If expectancy is still like -0.3R to -0.4R after this, then the entry environment is still the bigger issue.

Answer to “implement now?”

Given your results: yes, that is the next correct change — with one caveat:

Do not keep the old 30-min time stop in its current form.
Either remove it or make it apply only to !validated trades.

Otherwise you’ll keep seeing “had +0.9R MFE, died at 30-min.”

If you run it and post the new comparison table (same metrics plus “% validated within 3 bars”), we’ll know in one iteration whether this strategy has a real core edge or not.